Autonomy in Residential Care:


Original copy of Introduction:

In the United States, there is a
growing proportion of older adults living with one or more chronic
health conditions [1]. Individuals with a chronic health condition may
require assistance managing their condition in the home environment
and may experience functional limitations requiring assistance with
activities of daily living [2]. Residential care communities such as
assisted living facilities provide services that allow individuals
with care needs to continue to live independently, yet the transition
from the home environment to a residential care community may be
associated with loss of autonomy [3].


Given that reduced autonomy among older adults is associated with
negative health outcomes and decreased quality of life [4], services
designed to promote independent living among individuals with a
chronic health condition ought to incorporate features to preserve and
promote consumer autonomy. The optimal design of complex personal
health services such as these demands collaboration between multiple
disciplines, including service design, personal health informatics,
and the health sciences. Stickdorn and Schneider described “service
design thinking” as a mode of interdisciplinary thinking that
integrates the perspectives of different disciplines [5]. However,
interdisciplinary research collaboration presents unique challenges,
including divergent terminology, theoretical frameworks, and methods
of inquiry [6].


Choi and Pak described eight strategies to enhance interdisciplinary
collaboration, represented by the acronym TEAMWORK, which stands for
team, enthusiasm, accessibility, motivation, workplace, objectives,
role, and kinship [7]. In addition, Witteman and Stahl [8] advocated
the use of a five-step ‘deep dive’ [9] to enhance interdisciplinary
collaboration. The deep dive entails (1) conduct of secondary research
to identify gaps in current knowledge and understand the scope of the
problem; (2) conduct of primary research to observe current practices
and ascertain users’ perspectives; (3) visualization of proposed
designs; (4) development and testing of prototypes; and (5)
implementation of the newly designed service [8].


Despite the existence of frameworks meant to facilitate
interdisciplinary collaboration [7], reports describing
interdisciplinary research collaborations are limited [10].  Thus, in
this paper, we describe the strategies proposed by Choi and Pak [7]
and Witteman and Stahl [8] as they relate to our experiences
assembling and working as an interdisciplinary team.




Edit: At the end of the introduction, add a few sentences of
contribution: Built upon the prior TEAMWORK framework and ‘deep dive’
method, we contribute strategies drawing knowledge from a variety of
disciplines, using our team’s efforts to frame the problem of autonomy
among individuals with chronic health conditions who live in
residential care settings as a case study.
