** An Effectful Way to Eliminate Addiction to Dependence


Original copy of Abstract:

Abstract—We define a monadic translation of type theory, called
weaning translation, that allows for a large range of effects in
dependent type theory—such as exceptions, non-termination,
non-determinism or writing operation. Through the light of a
call-by-push-value decomposition, we explain why the traditional
approach fails with type dependency and justify our
approach. Crucially, the construction requires that the universe of
algebras of the monad forms itself an algebra. The weaning translation
applies to a version of the Calculus of Inductive Constructions (CIC)
with a restricted version of dependent elimination. Finally, we show
how to recover a translation of full CIC by mixing parametricity
techniques with the weaning translation. This provides the first
effectful version of CIC.


Revised copy:

Abstract:

We provide the first effectful version of the Calculus of Inductive
Constructions (CIC), thus supporting a large range of effects---such
as exceptions, non-termination, non-determinism, and writing
operations---combined with dependent type theory.  We do this by
providing a monadic translation, called the weaning translation.  We
abstractly characterize which monadic effects this translation can
model---namely, those whose universe of algebras of the monad form
itself an algebra, i.e., self-algebraic monads.  We develop this
translation for a version of CIC with restricted dependent
elimination, and explain through call-by-push-value decomposition how
type dependency interferes with effects.  By combining the weaning
translation with a well-known parametricity translation, we can extend
the translation to an unrestricted CIC.

In class edits:

We provide the first effectful version of the Calculus of Inductive
Constructions (CIC), combining dependent type theory with a large
range of effects, such as exceptions, non-termination,
non-determinism, and writing operations.

We do
this by providing a monadic translation, called the weaning
translation.

We abstractly characterize which monadic effects this
translation can model---namely, those whose universe of algebras of
the monad form itself an algebra, i.e., self-algebraic monads.

We
develop this translation first for a version of CIC with restricted
dependent elimination, and explain through call-by-push-value
decomposition how type dependency interferes with effects.

By
combining the weaning translation with a well-known parametricity
translation, we can then extend the translation to an unrestricted CIC.
