An effectful way to eliminate addiction to dependence


Original copy of Abstract: Abstract—We define a monadic translation of
type theory, called weaning translation, that allows for a large range
of effects in dependent type theory—such as exceptions,
non-termination, non-determinism or writing operation. Through the
light of a call-by-push-value decomposition, we explain why the
traditional approach fails with type dependency and justify our
approach. Crucially, the construction requires that the universe of
algebras of the monad forms itself an algebra. The weaning translation
applies to a version of the Calculus of Inductive Constructions (CIC)
with a restricted version of dependent elimination. Finally, we show
how to recover a translation of full CIC by mixing parametricity
techniques with the weaning translation. This provides the first
effectful version of CIC.


Edit:

The gap between type theories such as CIC and mainstream
programming languages comes to a large extend from the absence of
effects in type theories, because of its complex interaction with
dependency.

The traditional approach fails with type dependency
because [a, b, c.], through the light of a call-by-push-value
decomposition.

We contribute the definition of weaning translation,
the first monadic translation of type theory, which allows for a a
range of effects in dependent type theory.

The weaning translation
applies to a version of the Calculus of Inductive Constructions (CIC)
with a restricted version of dependent elimination.

Finally, we show
how to recover a translation of full CIC by mixing parametricity
techniques with the weaning translation.

In-class edits:

The gap between type theories such as CIC and mainstream
programming languages comes to a large extent from the absence of
effects in type theories.

Tyoe theories generally do not have effects
because of the complex interaction between
effects and dependency.

A call-by-push-value decomposition reveals the failures a,b, and c.

We define the \emph{weaning translation}, 
the first monadic translation of type theory, which allows for a 
range of effects in dependent type theory.

Our weaning translation
applies to a version of the Calculus of Inductive Constructions (CIC)
with a restricted version of dependent elimination.

Finally, we show
how to recover a translation of full CIC by mixing parametricity
techniques with the weaning translation.
