Abstract

We present a case study on the effectiveness of interdisciplinary
collaboration strategies on preserving the autonomy of patients in
residential care communities.


1. Introduction

In the United States, a growing proportion of older
adults are living with one or more chronic health conditions [1], who may
require assistance with activities of daily life [2]. Residential care
communities provide services that allow them to continue to live
independently, yet the transition from the home environment to a
residential care community may be associated with loss of autonomy
[3].

Preserving residents' autonomy demands collaboration between multiple
disciplines, but interdisciplinary collaboration is challenging and
not well studied.  Interdisciplinary research collaboration
presents unique challenges, including divergent terminology,
theoretical frameworks, and methods of inquiry [6]. In 2007, Choi and Pak
described eight strategies to enhance interdisciplinary collaboration,
represented by the acronym TEAMWORK [7]. More recently, Witteman and
Stahl [2013] have advocated the use of a five-step "Deep Dive" [9] to enhance
interdisciplinary collaboration. Despite the long existence of such
frameworks, reports describing interdisciplinary research
collaborations are limited [at least as of 2008:-)].

In 2016-2017, we assembled an interdisciplinary to attack the problem
of autonomy **need to say this better**.  Our goal was to produce a
conceptual model of residential care patient autonomy to guide
development of a service prototype for residential elder care
facilities.  In assembling our team and
beginning our work, we used some of the strategies proposed
by Choi and Pak [7] and Witteman and Stahl [8].   In this paper, we
report on our experiences with these strategies.

We assembled an interdisciplinary team
including researchers in nursing, business, health sciences, design,
and computer science.  We used the TEAMWork framework to help assemle
the team, and the "Deep Dive" strategies to integrate the team's
knowledge of different disciplines.

2. Assembling a team using the TEAMWORK framework

Choi and Pak use the acronym TEAMWORK, which stands for Team,
Enthusiasm, Accessibility, Motivation Workplace, Objectives, Role,
Kinship. These strategies are summarized in Table 1. 

	Team: Select team leaders familiar enough with involved
disciplines.  The project lead, a professor from the College of Arts,
Media and Design, started this project and contacted the Dean of the
School of Nursing and a tenured professor in the School of Business
for advice on which professors had background and research interests
related to any of the disciplines which inform service design. The
project lead formed a partnership with the professor from the School
of Nursing, establishing an interdisciplinary leadership team. The
leadership team then recruited an interdisciplinary team of
researchers: one from the School of Nursing; one from the joint
program of the College of Computer and Information Science and the
Bouvé College of Health Sciences; one from the School of Design at
Tongji University in China; one from the College of Arts, Media and
Design. Each researcher brought a unique perspective to autonomy among
residential care patient autonomy.

	Enthusiasm: Foster a personal commitment to the project.  One
barrier to enthusiasm described by Choi and Pak relates to the effect
a project has on investigators' careers. This effect could
particularly impact early career investigate, who made up most of our
team. For example, the publication strategy could be important to our
team, and varies across disciplines. In nursing and the health
sciences, a reputable journal is a more prestigious venue than a
conference, whereas the opposite is true in design and computer
science. This led to challenges deciding how to disseminate our
findings while furthering members' career goals.

	Accessibility: Work together, whether in a physical or virtual
setting.  For an international and interdisciplinary team, varying
schedules make regular meetings difficult. We overcame this barrier by
scheduling a weekly team meeting and using online platforms such as
Skype and Google Hangouts to connect with team members who could not
be physically present.

Another barrier was disciplinary-specific language and jargon. We used
a shared language and avoided disciplinary-specific jargon when
possible. We also read relevant journal articles from disciplines
outside of our own improved our understanding of each other's
disciplinary perspective, research methods, and terminology.

	Motivation: Ensure team members stay motivated.  Insufficient
time and funding are often barriers to motivation. Our project was
supported by a 15-month grant which covered student team members, data
collection, and data analysis software. However, we expected that
insufficient time would still impede our progress. So we had each team
member estimate their available weekly hours at the beginning of the
project, accounting for other unrelated duties. Labor-intensive phases
could then be scheduled for when team members were most likely to be
available.

	Workplace: Have institutional support for interdisciplinary
work.  We benefitted from affiliation with a university that supports
interdisciplinary collaboration, such as by providing dedicated space
for interdisciplinary team meetings. Support from faculty from several
disciplines facilitated recruitment of team members with varied
backgrounds.

	Objectives: Develop a shared vision for the project.  In order
to head off conflicting ideas of the project's goals, we met early on
to identify concepts relevant to elder autonomy from our disciplines'
perspectives. This allowed us to find both common areas of concern and
opportunities for each discipline to improve our understanding of the
problem.

	Role: Give team members clear roles.  We identified three
phases of our project: (1) secondary research; (2) primary research;
and (3) service design. All team members engaged in secondary
research, thereby gaining an understanding of elder autonomy from a
variety of perspectives. Team members from the School of Nursing and
College of Health Sciences, who were familiar with relevant
qualitative research methods, devised the primary research plan. Team
members from the School of Business and the College of Arts, Media,
and Design were primarily responsible for service design.

	Kinship: Promote open communication and constructive feedback
within the team.  Power imbalance and poor communication are bad for
team cohesion. Since our leadership team was interdisciplinary, the
power balance between disciplines within the team was perceived as
equal. Our weekly meetings were an opportunity for timely feedback on
in-progress work.


3. Integrating Team Knowledge using the Deep Dive methodology.

The Deep Dive technique for service design [9] was originally
developed by IDEO, an industrial design company, and has been widely
applied in interdisciplinary research. The Deep Dive entails

(1) secondary research to find gaps in current knowledge and specify the
scope of the problem;

(2) visualizing conceptual models;

(3) conducting user research to observe current practices;

(4) prototyping, designing, developing, and user testing; and

(5) implementation of the newly designed service.

In the period covered by this study, we completed only the first three
of these steps.

3.1 Conduct Secondary Research

We studied the literature from nursing, design, and human-computer
interaction to frame the problem.  From a nursing perspective,
autonomy goals include maintaining individuals' control over their
decisions [13], their privacy in residential care [14], and their
existing relationships with friends, families, and neighbors [15].
Prior design research has explored factors that can influence
autonomy, such as the design of the residents' physical environment.
[16].  Research in Human-Computer Interaction has developed a variety
of assistive technologies to support and improove autonomy in daily
activities [ , , , ]

3.2 Visualize Conceptual Models

We held a series of brainstorming meetings to generate conceptual
models to guide our user research. First, each team member
independently wrote a list of key terms they found in the
literature. A board of sticky notes assisted us in converging on
common ideas and concepts. We used the affinity diagram process [18]
to group common notes into themes. Our resulting themes included
quality of life, communication, social identity, transition, care
experience, emotional autonomy, and drivers of autonomy.

The conceptual model also included theoretical areas such as
ecological models and transformative service research.  Ecological
models focus on people's transactions with their physical and
sociocultural environments [5], integrating intrapersonal,
interpersonal, and community-level theories. Transformative service
research is a newer research area, focused on "changes and
improvements in the well-being of … individuals (consumers and
employees), communities, and the ecosystem" [19]. In residential care,
the two main interacting groups of people who must be considered are
consumers (patients and their families) and service providers (care
professionals and their support staff).

The result was the conceptual model shown in Figure 2.  (maybe)

3.3 Conduct User Research

We conducted user research to understand what ?determines?
autonomy for elderly residential care patients.
Qualitative research included semi-structured interviews, observations at
participants' homes, and journal entries written by participants about
their daily routines.
Quantitative assessments included the Allen
Cognitive Level Screen [21], which is used in nursing research and
clinical practice to assess capacity to accomplish everyday activities
[22], and the Rapid Assessment blah blah blah.

Eligible participants were (a) aged 65 years and older; (b)
living with at least one chronic health condition; (c) residents of a
residential care community; and (d) able to communicate in verbal and
written English.  All participants had signed consent forms prior to
data collection.  Ethical approval was granted by our university's
Institutional Review Board.


4. Conclusions

The TEAMWORK framework was useful for anticipating and overcoming
barriers to interdisciplinary collaboration. We ensured enthusiasm
with early discussions about authorship conventions and team members’
goals. We ensured accessibility via weekly meetings, whether in person
or online. Institutional support helped recruit an interdisciplinary
team and supported collaboration.

The "Deep Dive" framework served as a suitable guide for integrating
interdisciplinary knowledge. (*put something else here: Our team began
by conducting secondary research, which helped us understand how elder
autonomy is conceptualized across disciplines. Secondary research,
brainstorming, and visualization allowed us to generate a conceptual
model that guided primary research. In the next phase of our study, we
will apply our findings to develop and test a service prototype.*)

An important issue not addressed by either framework was a lack of a
common understanding of how the outcomes should be evaluated. In
nursing and health sciences, outcomes are measured by "effectiveness"
of intervention [23]. Using this approach, we would follow feasibility
and acceptability testing by measuring effective of our service
prototype in increasing residential care patient autonomy. By
contrast, designers tend not to rely on a pre-set framework to
evaluate the success of a design. Instead, they explore design problem
as they interact with users, and often conduct another set of user
test at the end of design phase for validation and refinement.
Designers believe that merely finding a research problem using a
framework and suggesting solutions is not sufficient in design; the
goal is to generate even better solutions.


4. Conclusion

We describe the challenges and benefits of interdisciplinary research
and identified strategies to promote interdisciplinary teamwork. The
case study described the early phases of a project that is dedicated
to promoting the residential care patient autonomy. We hope our case
study can support interdisciplinary collaboration.



In future work, we plan to summarize our quantitative data through
descriptive statistics and use the results to guide the prototype
design phase of our study. User testing and evaluation are left for
future work.
