Abstract

Residential care communities provide services that allow individuals
with chronic health conditions to live independently, yet the
transition from the home environment to a residential care community
may be associated with loss of autonomy. Services that aim to promote
autonomy in the residential care setting have the potential to improve
quality of life, yet the needs of individuals with chronic health
conditions are complex and best understood from an interdisciplinary
perspective. Although interdisciplinary research has been increasingly
applied in design practice and academia, it is associated with unique
challenges such as divergent terminology, differing theoretical
frameworks, and varying criteria to evaluate success across
disciplines. In this paper, we describe strategies to draw knowledge
from a variety of disciplines, using our team’s efforts to frame the
problem of autonomy among individuals with chronic health conditions
who live in residential care settings as a case study.


1. Introduction

In the United States, there is a growing proportion of older adults
living with one or more chronic health conditions [1]. Individuals
with a chronic health condition may require assistance managing their
condition in the home environment and may experience functional
limitations requiring assistance with activities of daily living
[2]. Residential care communities such as assisted living facilities
provide services that allow individuals with care needs to continue to
live independently, yet the transition from the home environment to a
residential care community may be associated with loss of autonomy
[3].

Given that reduced autonomy among older adults is associated with
negative health outcomes and decreased quality of life [4], services
designed to promote independent living among individuals with a
chronic health condition ought to incorporate features to preserve and
promote consumer autonomy. The optimal design of complex personal
health services such as these demands collaboration between multiple
disciplines, including service design, personal health informatics,
and the health sciences. Stickdorn and Schneider described “service
design thinking” as a mode of interdisciplinary thinking that
integrates the perspectives of different disciplines [5]. However,
interdisciplinary research collaboration presents unique challenges,
including divergent terminology, theoretical frameworks, and methods
of inquiry [6].

Choi and Pak described eight strategies to enhance interdisciplinary
collaboration, represented by the acronym TEAMWORK, which stands for
team, enthusiasm, accessibility, motivation, workplace, objectives,
role, and kinship [7]. In addition, Witteman and Stahl [8] advocated
the use of a five-step ‘deep dive’ [9] to enhance interdisciplinary
collaboration. The deep dive entails (1) conduct of secondary research
to identify gaps in current knowledge and understand the scope of the
problem; (2) conduct of primary research to observe current practices
and ascertain users’ perspectives; (3) visualization of proposed
designs; (4) development and testing of prototypes; and (5)
implementation of the newly designed service [8].

Despite the existence of frameworks meant to facilitate
interdisciplinary collaboration [7], reports describing
interdisciplinary research collaborations are limited [10]. Thus, in
this paper, we describe the strategies proposed by Choi and Pak [7]
and Witteman and Stahl [8] as they relate to our experiences
assembling and working as an interdisciplinary team.


2. Strategies to Facilitate Interdisciplinary Research: A Case Study

The purpose of our research project was to generate a conceptual model
of autonomy in the residential care setting that would inform the
development of a service prototype dedicated to promoting autonomy
among elders living in residential care facilities. In the following
section, we relate our experiences assembling a team of researchers
from the fields of service design, nursing, marketing, and computer
science in the context of the TEAMWORK framework proposed by Choi and
Pak [7]. In the subsequent section, we describe the strategies we
employed to integrate knowledge from the design, human factors, and
nursing literature to identify and frame the problem of autonomy among
individuals with chronic illness who reside in a residential care
facility.

2.1 TEAMWORK: Assembling a Team

	Team.  The first strategy of the TEAMWORK framework [7] is to
select one or more team leaders with enough familiarity with the
involved disciplines to recognize the expertise required by the
team. Team leaders need to have the interpersonal and communication
skills necessary to share their vision for the project, recruit team
members, and facilitate collaboration. The team members themselves
need to be mature and flexible, and they must agree that the research
question under study is best examined from the perspective of multiple
disciplines.

Our project was first envisioned by an assistant professor in our
university’s College of Arts, Media, and Design (MK). Recognizing the
ways in which the project would benefit from an interdisciplinary
perspective, this individual first met with the Dean of the School of
Nursing and a tenured professor in the School of Business, each of
whom agreed to advise the team throughout the duration of the
project. In collaboration with these advisors, the assistant professor
recruited team members from relevant disciplines who expressed
interest in the project and possessed the expertise necessary to make
a unique contribution to the team. First, the assistant professor from
the College of Arts, Media, and Design formed a partnership with an
assistant professor from the School of Nursing as a co-principal
investigator, thus establishing an interdisciplinary leadership
team. The leadership team then recruited an interdisciplinary team of
students that includes one PhD candidate from the School of Nursing;
one PhD student from a joint program of the College of Computer and
Information Science and the Bouvé College of Health Sciences; one
visiting scholar who is a Ph.D. candidate from the school of Design at
Tongji University in China; and one senior undergraduate Experience
Design student from the College of Arts, Media and Design. Each of the
involved disciplines contributes a unique perspective to the
understanding of autonomy among elders living with a chronic illness;
the team is attuned not only to the health issues that may affect the
autonomy of elders, but also to the environmental and systemic factors
that affect autonomy and may comprise suitable targets for
intervention.


	Enthusiasm.  Following the recruitment and selection of team
members, the next step within the TEAMWORK framework is to foster in
team members a personal commitment to the project. In particular, Choi
and Pak [7] observed that personal commitment is enhanced when the
research topic under study is of interest to the team members and when
the success of the project can assist team members in meeting their
career goals. Our interdisciplinary team is comprised primarily of
early career investigators for whom participation in this project
represents an opportunity to benefit from the guidance of senior
faculty while also gaining research experience. In addition, the topic
under study is relevant to each team member’s individual research
interests. Autonomy is a phenomenon of interest to designers, nurses,
and marketing professionals alike, each of whom aim to meet the needs
of individuals. Moreover, disciplinary subspecialties such as
transformative service design and well-being marketing specifically
seek to promote the well-being of consumers [11, 12].

Despite our enthusiasm about addressing an issue that impacts quality
of life and developing an intervention to serve others, we encountered
one of the barriers to enthusiasm described by Choi and Pak
[7]. Specifically, guidelines for multiple authorship vary across
disciplines. In nursing and the health sciences, the first author of a
manuscript or presentation is understood to be the individual who made
the most significant contribution to a scholarly work, while the last
author is increasingly regarded as the “senior” author who oversaw the
project being reported. In other disciplines, such as design and
marketing, authors are simply listed in descending order of
contribution. Similarly, differences in tenure decisions exist across
disciplines. In nursing and the health sciences, publication in a
reputable journal is valued more highly than presentation at a
conference, yet the opposite is true in design and computer
science. These differences posed a challenge to our team as we sought
to produce scholarly works that would most effectively disseminate our
research findings while also assisting our team members to meet their
career objectives.


	Accessibility.  The third strategy of the TEAMWORK framework
is to ensure accessibility of the team members. Choi and Pak [7]
described the importance of working together in either a physical or
virtual setting, using the Internet and e-mail as a supporting
platform when necessary. This strategy was essential to ensuring
regular communication among our team. Departmental meetings,
disciplinary conferences, and teaching responsibilities often made it
difficult for team members to connect in person. We overcame this
barrier by scheduling a weekly team meeting and using online platforms
such as Skype and Google Hangouts to connect with team members who
could not be physically present. We also sought to enhance
accessibility by using shared language and avoiding
disciplinary-specific jargon to the extent possible. Reading relevant
journal articles from disciplines outside of our own improved our
understanding of one another’s specific disciplinary perspective,
research methods, and terminology.


	Motivation.  The next strategy outlined in the TEAMWORK
framework is to ensure team members stay motivated to participate in
the project. Choi and Pak [7] observed that for some team members, the
potential for the project to answer a challenging research question
may serve as its own motivation, but that additional incentives may be
necessary. Insufficient time and insufficient funding may serve as
further barriers to motivation.

Our project received financial support in the form of a 15-month
grant, which allowed the team leaders to provide financial support to
student team members, fund data collection, and purchase the proper
software to analyze the data. However, we recognized at the outset
that insufficient time was likely to impede our progress. To address
this barrier, we devised a plan to account for team members’ evolving
responsibilities and schedules. At the beginning of the project, team
members were asked to estimate the number of hours per week they would
be able to commit to the project over its 15-month duration. This
permitted faculty to account for teaching responsibilities and student
team members to account for coursework and dissertationrelated
deadlines. Labor-intensive project phases were scheduled for when team
members were most likely to be available. For example, we engaged in
secondary research during the summer, when most team members had fewer
responsibilities within their respective schools and colleges. Primary
data collection took place primarily over the winter break, when team
members were available to interview and observe participants.


	Workplace.  Choi and Pak [7] emphasized the importance of
institutional support for interdisciplinary collaboration. Our team
benefitted from being affiliated with a university that values
interdisciplinary collaboration, offering numerous interdisciplinary
majors and minors, and providing space for interdisciplinary team
meetings at its interdisciplinary science and engineering complex. The
support of tenured faculty from several disciplines facilitated
recruitment of a diverse team and provided student and faculty team
members with the opportunity to collaborate outside their respective
schools and colleges.


	Objectives.  Development of a common goal and shared vision is
the sixth strategy outlined in the TEAMWORK framework. Choi and Pak
[7] cautioned that discipline conflicts may arise when team members
have conflicting ideas about the concepts that form the basis for
their analysis. Within several months of assembling our team, we
engaged in a brainstorming exercise to identify concepts relevant to
elder autonomy from the perspective of each of our disciplines. This
exercise allowed us to identify common areas of concern as well as
areas in which the perspectives of another discipline could improve
understanding of the problem under study.


	Role.  The TEAMWORK framework advocates negotiating clear
roles and rotating responsibilities among team members to reduce role
overload. Our approach involved identifying three key phases of our
project: (1) secondary research; (2) primary research; and (3) service
design. All team members engaged in secondary research, which allowed
each team member to gain an understanding of elder autonomy from a
variety of perspectives. Team members from the School of Nursing and
College of Health Sciences who were familiar with qualitative research
methods and the issues facing elders living with a chronic illness
devised the plan for the primary research phase, while team members
from the School of Business and the College of Arts, Media, and Design
were primarily responsible for the service design phase.


	Kinship.  The final strategy of the TEAMWORK framework is to
facilitate open communication between team members and to provide
constructive feedback on team members’ performance. Lack of
communication may hinder the working relationship; similarly, unequal
power between disciplines may result in group rivalry. We engaged in
weekly team meetings in which team members discussed and provided
feedback on both the research strategy and written products of
research such as abstracts and manuscripts. Given that our leadership
team itself was interdisciplinary, power between disciplines was
perceived as equal. In addition, our division of the workload
according to each team member’s area of expertise ensured each team
member was recognized for his or her strengths.


2.2 Framing the Problem: Conducting a Deep Dive

The Deep-Dive technique [9] was originally developed by the IDEO, a
leading industrial design company, and has been widely applied in
interdisciplinary research to enhance collaboration and
participation. The deep dive entails (1) conducting secondary research
to identify gaps in current knowledge and understand the scope of the
problem; (2) visualizing theory-based conceptual models; (3)
conducting user research to observe current practices and ascertain
users’ perspectives; (4) prototyping, designing, developing, and user
testing; and (5) implementation of the newly designed service [8]. We
adapted the ‘deep dive’ technique [8] in this work to improve the
performance of our interdisciplinary team across the fields. Since
this project is in progress, we will not describe the last two phases,
which are prototyping design, implementation, and evaluation in this
paper.


2.2.1 Identify Research Problems

We conducted secondary research from the design, nursing, and
human-computer interaction literature to identify and frame the
problem of autonomy among older adults with chronic illness who live
in residential care facilities. From a nursing perspective,
determinants of autonomy in this population include the degree to
which individuals retain control over their decisions [13], have
privacy in residential care [14], and are able to maintain existing
relationships with their friends, families, and neighbors [15]. From a
design perspective, prior research has explored how design can
influence an individual’s autonomy. Friedman’s work [16] discussed how
hardware design can either hinder or improve a person’s technology
control. In the field of human-computer interaction, researchers have
proposed four spheres of autonomy in technology design [17]. These
four spheres include designing autonomy in technology design,
designing assistive technologies to support and improve autonomy in
daily activities, addressing individual needs through personalized
design, and design technologies to enhance autonomy through
psychological development.

Researchers have explored and discussed autonomy, how design can
influence autonomy, and how to improve autonomy using technology in
their own fields. However, there have been few investigations into how
to enhance autonomy among elders living with a chronic health
condition through design. Therefore, our interdisciplinary research
team aimed to identify this gap and understand the scope of the
problem.


2.2.2 Visualize Theory-Based Conceptual Models

Our interdisciplinary team conducted a series of brainstorming
workshops to generate conceptual models to guide the user research
phase. First, each team member extracted key terms from the literature
independently and wrote down the terms on sticky notes (Fig. 1). The
use of sticky notes can assist a team to converge on common ideas and
concepts and move thoughts around. Next, we used the affinity diagram
[18] process to identify themes by grouping common notes. Themes that
emerged after the affinity process included quality of life,
communication, social identity, transition, care experience, emotional
autonomy, and drivers of autonomy.

In the field of nursing and health sciences, to develop and implement
an effective product, a theory-based approach is necessary since it
guides program development and provides a foundation for the
evaluation of impact [4]. Built upon public health and behavioral
science, ecological models focus on the nature of people’s
transactions with their physical and sociocultural environments
[5]. Ecological models provide a framework to create a more
comprehensive method to design and develop studies by integrating
multilevel influences including intrapersonal, interpersonal, and
community level theories.

Transformative Service Research (TSR) is a relatively new research
area that focuses on services and well-being. TSR is defined as ‘the
integration of consumer and service research that centers on creating
uplifting changes and improvements in the well-being of consumer
entities: individuals (consumers and employees), communities and the
ecosystem’ [19]. In the context of the residential care setting, there
are mainly two groups of people interact in the delivery of health
care services: consumers (e.g., the elderly and/or their families) and
nursing home service providers (e.g., licensed professionals and
support staff). Therefore, we take both parties into consideration
when designing the conceptual model described below.

Our visualization led to the development of a conceptual model that
was based upon existing social-ecological models, design theories, and
transformative service design. The model is presented as follows
(Fig. 2):


2.2.3 Conduct User Research

We next conducted qualitative user research to understand the
determinants of autonomy among elders living with a chronic health
condition in the residential care setting. The human-centered research
method included semi-structured interviews, field observations at
participants’ homes, and journal entries completed by participants
that documented their daily routines. Quantitative assessments
included the Rapid Estimate of Health Literacy in Medicine – Short
Form [20] and the Allen Cognitive Level Screen (ACLS) [21]. The ACLS
is used in nursing research and clinical practice to assess functional
cognition, which is defined as an individual’s capacity to accomplish
everyday activities in community living environments [22]. Ethical
approval was granted by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at our
university. All participants had signed consent forms prior to data
collection. Eligible participants were (a) aged 65 years and older;
(b) living with at least one chronic health condition; (c) residents
of a residential care community; and (d) able to communicate in verbal
and written English.

In the next phase of our study, we will analyze qualitative data
through directed content analysis and will summarize quantitative data
through descriptive statistics. The results of these analyses will
guide the prototype design phase of our study, while user testing and
evaluation are left for future work.


2.3 Interdisciplinary Research Evaluation

In the fields of nursing and the health sciences, effectiveness is an
essential outcome measure of intervention research [23]. Following
feasibility and acceptability testing, one of our goals will be to
determine the extent to which the service prototype increases autonomy
among elders living with a chronic health condition in the residential
care setting.

In contrast, designers tend to not heavily rely on a pre-set framework
to evaluate the success of design research. Instead, they explore
design problem by thinking as making and research through design as
they interact with users, and often conduct another set of user test
at the end of design phase for validation and refinement. The final
deliverable often comes with products. However, finding a research
problem using a framework and suggesting useful and usable solutions
is not sufficient in design field. The goal is to generate even better
and desirable solutions.


3 Discussion

Our experience assembling an interdisciplinary research team
illustrates the utility of the TEAMWORK framework [7] for anticipating
and overcoming several barriers to interdisciplinary collaboration. In
particular, our experience illustrates the importance of early
discussions about authorship conventions and team members’ goals for
producing scholarly works. Frequent communication via weekly meetings,
whether in person or online, improved team members’ accessibility and
maintained their motivation. Institutional support facilitated the
recruitment of team members and provided an environment conducive to
collaboration.

The five-step “deep dive” [9] serves as a suitable guide for
integrating knowledge from several disciplines. Our team began by
conducting secondary research, a procedure that not only allowed us to
identify gaps in knowledge, but also to gain an improved understanding
of the ways in which elder autonomy is conceptualized across
disciplines. Secondary research, brainstorming, and visualization
allowed us to generate a conceptual model that guided primary data
collection and analysis. In the next phase of our study, we will apply
our research findings to the development and testing of a service
prototype.


4 Conclusion

In this paper, we described the challenges and benefits of
interdisciplinary research and identified strategies to promote
interdisciplinary teamwork. The included case study described the
early phases of a project that is dedicated to promoting the autonomy
of elders living with a chronic health condition in the residential
care setting. In closing, we hope this description of our experiences
can empower researchers to engage in their own interdisciplinary
collaborations.

